mysql/intro-mysql-commands.md, before:

autoscale: true
slidenumbers: true
theme: Plain Jane, 3
build-lists: true

# Introductory MySQL Commands
Principles of Databases (CS 365)

---

## UTF-8 Character Set Conflicts
* Use UTF-8 character sets whenever possible

---

## MySQL Configuration File
* On macOS, add `my.cnf` to the `/etc` folder.
* In Windows `my.cnf` may be called `my.ini` and could be in one of many places. Read the official documentation from `dev.mysql.com` at [https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/option-files.html](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/option-files.html)

---

## Logging in
The following command says, “Log in to MySQL as user (`-u`) root and tell the CLI to request my password (`-p`).

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

---

## Logging in
You can also close the space between `-u` and root, as follows:

```bash
mysql -uroot -p
```

---

## Logging in
You can also append the password to the `-p` option. (No space character.) For example, if my password were `password`, I could log in as follows:

```bash
mysql -u root -ppassword
```

or

```bash
mysql -uroot -ppassword
```

---

## Logging in
Appending the password to the `-p` option is insecure, as the password would sit as a plain text entry in your CLI’s history file.

In `bash`, for example, you’d find the password in `.bash_history`. You could clear it (and the rest of your history) with the `-c` flag to the `history` command:

```bash
history -c
```

---

## Logging in

The more secure option is to have MySQL request your password via your CLI.

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

---

## Exiting MySQL
Similar to exiting your CLI, exiting MySQL is simply…

```sql
EXIT
```

---

## Warnings
If an error is generated, you can see the latest warning with

```sql
SHOW WARNINGS;
```

---

## Checking the Status of the Database
You can view some important information, such as current user and database, IP address, and character set configurations, using the `STATUS` command:

```sql
STATUS
```

---

## Creating a Database
Let’s create a database called `users` with a default and collation character set of UTF-8.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE `users` DEFAULT CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
```

**Note**: This doesn’t place focus on the new database; it simply creates it.

---

## Creating a Database | Placing Focus
To work with a database, you need to focus on it by using the `USE` command. Let’s focus on the `users` database:

```sql
USE users
```

If you now run `STATUS`, you’ll see, `Current database: users` below `Connection id`.

---

## Add a User to the Database with a Password
Let’s create a user called `the-user` whose password is `the-password`.

```sql
CREATE USER 'the-user'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'the-Passw0rd!';
```

---

## Provide a User Access to the Database
Let’s now grant `the-user` _all_ privileges to _all_ the tables under the `users` database

```sql
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON users.* to 'the-user'@'localhost';
```

---

## Logging into the Database with the New User
Exit the database (`exit`), then log back in as the new user:


```bash
mysql -u the-user -p
```

---

## Show Databases
You can see the databases to which you have access with the `SHOW` command:

```sql
SHOW DATABASES;
```

---

## Create a Table

```sql
CREATE TABLE students (
  first_name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
  last_name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL
);
```

**Note**: Both are set to `NOT NULL`, meaning that an entry into the `students` table can only happen when both values are present. What happens when you try to defeat the `NOT NULL` rule?

---

## Show Tables
Show the tables in the current database:

```sql
SHOW TABLES;
```

---

## Flush the Contents of a Table
To empty the contents of a table is to flush them. Flushing means that MySQL will drop the tables, then recreate them without any entries.

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE students;
```

---

## Drop/Delete a Table
Let’s delete the `students` table.

```sql
DROP TABLE students;
```

**Note**: This isn’t the same as `TRUNCATE`, which flushes the tuples in the table, but doesn’t delete the table.

---

## Insert a Single Record in a Table (CREATE)
```sql
INSERT INTO students
  (first_name, last_name)
VALUES
  ("Fred", 'Flinstone');
```

**Note**: I can wrap values in inch marks (") or foot marks ('), as long as they’re balanced.

---

## Insert Multiple Records into a Table (CREATE)

```sql
INSERT INTO students
  (first_name, last_name)
VALUES
  ('Edward', 'Bobward'),
  ('Ed', 'Bob'),
  ('Frank', 'Enstein'),
  ('Johnny', 'Rotten');
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table (READ)

```sql
SELECT * FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table with a Matching Clause (READ)
Let’s get all students whose first name is Frank.

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE first_name = "Frank";
```

---

## Pattern Matching
Let’s get all students whose first name starts with “ed”.

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE first_name LIKE "Ed%";
```

or for a more case-insensitive search:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE UPPER(first_name) LIKE UPPER("ed%");
```

---

## Pattern Matching

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE last_name LIKE "%Bob";
```

Or, for a more case-insensitive search:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE UPPER(last_name) LIKE UPPER("%bob");
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table’s Column (READ)
Let’s get all `first_name`s from the `students` table.

```sql
SELECT first_name FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table’s Column (READ)
Or `last_name`s.

```sql
SELECT last_name FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table in Reverse Order (READ)

```sql
SELECT last_name, first_name FROM students;
```

---

## Describe the Fields/Columns in a Table
There are at least 3 different ways to describe the structure of a table.

```sql
SHOW COLUMNS FROM students;
DESC students;
DESCRIBE students;
```

---

## Update (UPDATE)
Let’s change Frank’s first name to Albert:

```sql
UPDATE students SET first_name="Albert" WHERE first_name="Frank";
```

---

## Remove (DELETE)
Let’s remove Johnny, who’s no longer a student:

```sql
DELETE FROM students WHERE first_name="Johnny";
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
There are multiple ways to delete a database. The most common and modern way is…

```sql
DROP DATABASE IF EXISTS users;
```

or

```sql
DROP DATABASE users;
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
`SCHEMA` is synonymous with `DATABASE`. Thus, you could also say…

```sql
DROP SCHEMA IF EXISTS users;
```

or

```sql
DROP SCHEMA users;
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
We’ll now need to remove the user — whose username is `the-user` — from MySQL.

```sql
DROP USER IF EXISTS 'the-user'@'localhost';
```

---

## Stand up a Database in Two Commands
Log in to MySQL…

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

…then load `setup.sql`:

```sql
source setup.sql
```

---

## Stand up a Database in Two Commands
You can also stand up the database in one command:

```bash
mysql -u root -p < setup.sql
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Remove all rows from a table.

```sql
DELETE FROM track;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete Every Country’s Sun

```sql
DELETE FROM album WHERE album_name = "Every Country’s Sun";
```

or

```sql
DELETE FROM album
WHERE (artist_id = 5 AND album_id = 2);
```

The latter makes use of the keys that we used to design the database. As such, it is more secure.

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete _all_ albums with an `album_id` of `1`.

```sql
DELETE FROM ALBUM WHERE album_id = 1;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete an artist, their album(s), and those albums’ tracks. First, let’s choose a band, Melvins.

```sql
SELECT artist_id, artist_name, album_name
FROM artist INNER JOIN album
USING (artist_id)
WHERE artist_name = "Melvins";
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Now we can delete everything related to The Melvins.

```sql
DELETE FROM artist, album, track USING artist, album, track
WHERE artist.artist_id = 4 AND
artist.artist_id = album.artist_id AND
artist.artist_id = track.artist_id AND
album.album_id = track.album_id;
```

Compare with…

```sql
DELETE FROM artist, album, track USING artist, album, track
WHERE artist.artist_id = 4 AND
artist.artist_id = album.artist_id AND
artist.artist_id = track.artist_id;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement

And, we can now verify:

```sql
SELECT track_name
FROM track
WHERE artist_id = 4;
```

Commit message:

Add another pattern matching example

mysql/intro-mysql-commands.md, after:

autoscale: true
slidenumbers: true
theme: Plain Jane, 3
build-lists: true

# Introductory MySQL Commands
Principles of Databases (CS 365)

---

## UTF-8 Character Set Conflicts
* Use UTF-8 character sets whenever possible

---

## MySQL Configuration File
* On macOS, add `my.cnf` to the `/etc` folder.
* In Windows `my.cnf` may be called `my.ini` and could be in one of many places. Read the official documentation from `dev.mysql.com` at [https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/option-files.html](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/option-files.html)

---

## Logging in
The following command says, “Log in to MySQL as user (`-u`) root and tell the CLI to request my password (`-p`).

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

---

## Logging in
You can also close the space between `-u` and root, as follows:

```bash
mysql -uroot -p
```

---

## Logging in
You can also append the password to the `-p` option. (No space character.) For example, if my password were `password`, I could log in as follows:

```bash
mysql -u root -ppassword
```

or

```bash
mysql -uroot -ppassword
```

---

## Logging in
Appending the password to the `-p` option is insecure, as the password would sit as a plain text entry in your CLI’s history file.

In `bash`, for example, you’d find the password in `.bash_history`. You could clear it (and the rest of your history) with the `-c` flag to the `history` command:

```bash
history -c
```

---

## Logging in

The more secure option is to have MySQL request your password via your CLI.

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

---

## Exiting MySQL
Similar to exiting your CLI, exiting MySQL is simply…

```sql
EXIT
```

---

## Warnings
If an error is generated, you can see the latest warning with

```sql
SHOW WARNINGS;
```

---

## Checking the Status of the Database
You can view some important information, such as current user and database, IP address, and character set configurations, using the `STATUS` command:

```sql
STATUS
```

---

## Creating a Database
Let’s create a database called `users` with a default and collation character set of UTF-8.

```sql
CREATE DATABASE `users` DEFAULT CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_bin;
```

**Note**: This doesn’t place focus on the new database; it simply creates it.

---

## Creating a Database | Placing Focus
To work with a database, you need to focus on it by using the `USE` command. Let’s focus on the `users` database:

```sql
USE users
```

If you now run `STATUS`, you’ll see, `Current database: users` below `Connection id`.

---

## Add a User to the Database with a Password
Let’s create a user called `the-user` whose password is `the-password`.

```sql
CREATE USER 'the-user'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'the-Passw0rd!';
```

---

## Provide a User Access to the Database
Let’s now grant `the-user` _all_ privileges to _all_ the tables under the `users` database

```sql
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON users.* to 'the-user'@'localhost';
```

---

## Logging into the Database with the New User
Exit the database (`exit`), then log back in as the new user:


```bash
mysql -u the-user -p
```

---

## Show Databases
You can see the databases to which you have access with the `SHOW` command:

```sql
SHOW DATABASES;
```

---

## Create a Table

```sql
CREATE TABLE students (
  first_name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
  last_name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL
);
```

**Note**: Both are set to `NOT NULL`, meaning that an entry into the `students` table can only happen when both values are present. What happens when you try to defeat the `NOT NULL` rule?

---

## Show Tables
Show the tables in the current database:

```sql
SHOW TABLES;
```

---

## Flush the Contents of a Table
To empty the contents of a table is to flush them. Flushing means that MySQL will drop the tables, then recreate them without any entries.

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE students;
```

---

## Drop/Delete a Table
Let’s delete the `students` table.

```sql
DROP TABLE students;
```

**Note**: This isn’t the same as `TRUNCATE`, which flushes the tuples in the table, but doesn’t delete the table.

---

## Insert a Single Record in a Table (CREATE)
```sql
INSERT INTO students
  (first_name, last_name)
VALUES
  ("Fred", 'Flinstone');
```

**Note**: I can wrap values in inch marks (") or foot marks ('), as long as they’re balanced.

---

## Insert Multiple Records into a Table (CREATE)

```sql
INSERT INTO students
  (first_name, last_name)
VALUES
  ('Edward', 'Bobward'),
  ('Ed', 'Bob'),
  ('Frank', 'Enstein'),
  ('Johnny', 'Rotten');
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table (READ)

```sql
SELECT * FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table with a Matching Clause (READ)
Let’s get all students whose first name is Frank.

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE first_name = "Frank";
```

---

## Pattern Matching
Let’s get all students whose first name starts with “ed”.

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE first_name LIKE "Ed%";
```

or for a more case-insensitive search:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE UPPER(first_name) LIKE UPPER("ed%");
```

---

## Pattern Matching

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE last_name LIKE "%Bob";
```

Or, for a more case-insensitive search:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students WHERE UPPER(last_name) LIKE UPPER("%bob");
```

---

## Pattern Matching

Get all track names that start with “Do” followed by 9 characters, listed alphabetically:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM track
WHERE track_name LIKE 'Do_________'
ORDER BY track_name;
```

The underscore (`_`) character is a placeholder for any character.

---

## Read All Records from a Table’s Column (READ)
Let’s get all `first_name`s from the `students` table.

```sql
SELECT first_name FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table’s Column (READ)
Or `last_name`s.

```sql
SELECT last_name FROM students;
```

---

## Read All Records from a Table in Reverse Order (READ)

```sql
SELECT last_name, first_name FROM students;
```

---

## Describe the Fields/Columns in a Table
There are at least 3 different ways to describe the structure of a table.

```sql
SHOW COLUMNS FROM students;
DESC students;
DESCRIBE students;
```

---

## Update (UPDATE)
Let’s change Frank’s first name to Albert:

```sql
UPDATE students SET first_name="Albert" WHERE first_name="Frank";
```

---

## Remove (DELETE)
Let’s remove Johnny, who’s no longer a student:

```sql
DELETE FROM students WHERE first_name="Johnny";
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
There are multiple ways to delete a database. The most common and modern way is…

```sql
DROP DATABASE IF EXISTS users;
```

or

```sql
DROP DATABASE users;
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
`SCHEMA` is synonymous with `DATABASE`. Thus, you could also say…

```sql
DROP SCHEMA IF EXISTS users;
```

or

```sql
DROP SCHEMA users;
```

---

## Remove a Database and Its Users
We’ll now need to remove the user — whose username is `the-user` — from MySQL.

```sql
DROP USER IF EXISTS 'the-user'@'localhost';
```

---

## Stand up a Database in Two Commands
Log in to MySQL…

```bash
mysql -u root -p
```

…then load `setup.sql`:

```sql
source setup.sql
```

---

## Stand up a Database in Two Commands
You can also stand up the database in one command:

```bash
mysql -u root -p < setup.sql
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Remove all rows from a table.

```sql
DELETE FROM track;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete Every Country’s Sun

```sql
DELETE FROM album WHERE album_name = "Every Country’s Sun";
```

or

```sql
DELETE FROM album
WHERE (artist_id = 5 AND album_id = 2);
```

The latter makes use of the keys that we used to design the database. As such, it is more secure.

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete _all_ albums with an `album_id` of `1`.

```sql
DELETE FROM ALBUM WHERE album_id = 1;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Let’s delete an artist, their album(s), and those albums’ tracks. First, let’s choose a band, Melvins.

```sql
SELECT artist_id, artist_name, album_name
FROM artist INNER JOIN album
USING (artist_id)
WHERE artist_name = "Melvins";
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement
Now we can delete everything related to The Melvins.

```sql
DELETE FROM artist, album, track USING artist, album, track
WHERE artist.artist_id = 4 AND
artist.artist_id = album.artist_id AND
artist.artist_id = track.artist_id AND
album.album_id = track.album_id;
```

Compare with…

```sql
DELETE FROM artist, album, track USING artist, album, track
WHERE artist.artist_id = 4 AND
artist.artist_id = album.artist_id AND
artist.artist_id = track.artist_id;
```

---

## The `DELETE` Statement

And, we can now verify:

```sql
SELECT track_name
FROM track
WHERE artist_id = 4;
```
